Adds the python bindings tutorial (#450)
gazebosim/gz-transport: tutorials/06_python_support.md

\page python Python Support

Next Tutorial: \ref security
Previous Tutorial: \ref services

## Overview

> In this tutorial, we are going to show the functionalities implemented in python. This features are brought up to python by creating bindings from the C++ implementation using pybind11. It is important to note that not all of C++ features are available yet in python, on this tutorial we will go over the most relevant features we currently have on python. For more information refer to the [__init__.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/src/__init__.py) file which is a wrapper for all the bindings.

Reviewer: shorten lines 
```suggestion
In this tutorial, we are going to show the functionalities implemented in python. This features are brought up to python by creating bindings from the C++ implementation using pybind11. It is important to note that not all of C++ features are available yet in Python, on this tutorial we will go over the most relevant features we currently have on Python. For more information refer to the [__init__.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/src/__init__.py) file which is a wrapper for all the bindings.
```

Author: Done.

> For this tutorial, we will create two nodes that are going to communicate via messages. One node will be a publisher that generates the information,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, we will create two nodes that communicate via messages. One node will be a publisher that generates the information,
```

Author: Thanks and done.

whereas the other node will be the subscriber consuming the information. Our
nodes will be running on different processes within the same machine.

```{.sh}
mkdir ~/gz_transport_tutorial
cd ~/gz_transport_tutorial
```

## Publisher

Download the [publisher.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/publisher.py) file within the `gz_transport_tutorial`
folder and open it with your favorite editor:

\snippet python/examples/publisher.py complete

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.msgs10.vector3d_pb2 import Vector3d
    from gz.transport13 import Node
```

> The library `gz.transport13` contains all the Gazebo Transport elements that can be used in python. The final API we will use is contained inside the class `Node`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The library `gz.transport13` contains all the Gazebo Transport elements that can be used in Python. The final API we will use is contained inside the class `Node`.
```

Author: Done.

The lines `from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg` and `from gz.msgs10.vector3d_pb2 import Vector3d` includes the generated protobuf code that we are going to use
for our messages. We are going to publish two types of messages: `StringMsg` and `Vector3d` protobuf messages.

```{.py}
    node = Node()
    stringmsg_topic = "/example_stringmsg_topic"
    vector3d_topic = "/example_vector3d_topic"
    pub_stringmsg = node.advertise(stringmsg_topic, StringMsg)
    pub_vector3d = node.advertise(vector3d_topic, Vector3d)
```

First of all we declare a *Node* that will offer some of the transport
functionality. In our case, we are interested in publishing topic updates, so

> the first step is to announce our topics names and their  types. Once a topic name is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the first step is to announce our topics names and their types. Once a topic name is
```

Author: Done.

          time.sleep(0.1)

    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        pass
```

In this section of the code we create the protobuf messages and fill them with
content. Next, we iterate in a loop that publishes one message every 100ms to each topic.
The method *publish()* sends a message to all the subscribers.

## Subscriber

Download the [subscriber.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/subscriber.py)
file into the `gz_transport_tutorial` folder and open it with your favorite editor:

\snippet python/examples/subscriber.py complete

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.msgs10.vector3d_pb2 import Vector3d
    from gz.transport13 import Node
```

Just as before, we are importing the `Node` class from the `gz.transport13` library and the generated code for the `StringMsg` and `Vector3d` protobuf messages.

```{.py}
    def stringmsg_cb(msg: StringMsg):
        print("Received StringMsg: [{}]".format(msg.data))

    def vector3_cb(msg: Vector3d):
        print("Received Vector3: [x: {}, y: {}, z: {}]".format(msg.x, msg.y, msg.z))
```

> We need to register a function callback that will execute every time we receive
> a new topic update. The signature of the callback is always similar to the ones

Reviewer: ```suggestion

We need to register a function callback that will execute every time we receive
a new topic update. The signature of the callback is always similar to the ones
```

Author: Done.

    # subscribe to a topic by registering a callback
    if node.subscribe(StringMsg, topic_stringmsg, stringmsg_cb):
        print("Subscribing to type {} on topic [{}]".format(
            StringMsg, topic_stringmsg))
    else:
        print("Error subscribing to topic [{}]".format(topic_stringmsg))
        return
    # subscribe to a topic by registering a callback
    if node.subscribe(Vector3d, topic_vector3d, vector3_cb):
        print("Subscribing to type {} on topic [{}]".format(
            Vector3d, topic_vector3d))
    else:
        print("Error subscribing to topic [{}]".format(topic_vector3d))
        return
```

After the node creation, the method `subscribe()` allows you to subscribe to a
given topic by specifying the message type, the topic name and a subscription callback function.

```{.py}
    # wait for shutdown
    try:
      while True:
        time.sleep(0.001)
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
      pass
```

If you don't have any other tasks to do besides waiting for incoming messages, we create an infinite loop that checks for messages each 1ms that will block your current thread
until you hit *CTRL-C*.

## Updating PYTHONPATH

> If you made the binary installation of Gazebo Transport, you can skip this step and go directly to the next section. Otherwise, if you built the package from source it is needed to update the PYTHONPATH in order for python to recognize the library by doing the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you made the binary installation of Gazebo Transport, you can skip this step and go directly to the next section. Otherwise, if you built the package from source it is needed to update the PYTHONPATH in order for Python to recognize the library by doing the following:
```

Author: Done.

We developed a couple of examples that demonstrate this particular issue. Take a look at a publisher and subscriber (whithin the same node) that have race conditions triggered in the [data_race_without_mutex.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/data_race_without_mutex.py) file. The proposed solution to this issue is to use the `threading` library, you can see the same example with a mutex in the [data_race_with_mutex.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/data_race_with_mutex.py) file.

You can run any of those examples by just doing the following in a terminal:
```{.sh}
python3 ./data_race_without_mutex.py
```

> or

Reviewer: ```suggestion

or
```

Author: Done.

to use but it can be handy in situations like when we want to control the rate
of messages published per topic.

We can declare the throttling option using the following code :

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.transport13 import Node, AdvertiseMessageOptions

    # Create a transport node and advertise a topic with throttling enabled.
    node = Node()
    topic_name = "/foo"

    # Setting the throttling option
    opts = AdvertiseMessageOptions()
    opts.msgs_per_sec = 1
    pub = node.advertise(topic_name, StringMsg, opts);
    if (!pub):
      print("Error advertising topic" + topic_name)
      return False
```

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    # Setting the throttling option
    opts = AdvertiseMessageOptions()
    opts.msgs_per_sec = 1
```

In this section of code, we declare an *AdvertiseMessageOptions* object and use it to set the publishing rate (the member `msgs_per_sec`), In our case, the rate specified is 1 msg/sec.

```{.py}
    pub = node.advertise(topic_name, StringMsg, opts);
```

Next, we advertise the topic with message throttling enabled. To do it, we pass opts

> as an argument to the *advertise()* method.
> 
> 
> ## Subscribe Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an argument to the *advertise()* method.

## Subscribe Options
```

Author: Done.

\page python Python Support

Next Tutorial: \ref security
Previous Tutorial: \ref services

## Overview

> In this tutorial, we are going to show the functionalities implemented in Python. This features are brought up by creating bindings from the C++ implementation using pybind11. It is important to note that not all of C++ features are available yet, on this tutorial we will go over the most relevant features. For more information refer to the [__init__.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/src/__init__.py) file which is a wrapper for all the bindings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we are going to show the functionalities implemented in Python. These features are brought up by creating bindings from the C++ implementation using pybind11. It is important to note that not all of C++ features are available yet, on this tutorial we will go over the most relevant features. For more information refer to the [__init__.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/src/__init__.py) file which is a wrapper for all the bindings.
```

Author: Done.

> In this tutorial, we are going to show the functionalities implemented in Python. This features are brought up by creating bindings from the C++ implementation using pybind11. It is important to note that not all of C++ features are available yet, on this tutorial we will go over the most relevant features. For more information refer to the [__init__.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/src/__init__.py) file which is a wrapper for all the bindings.

Reviewer 3: Can you keep the line width at 120 or so. It makes it easier to do reviews.

Author: Done.

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.msgs10.vector3d_pb2 import Vector3d
    from gz.transport13 import Node
```

The library `gz.transport13` contains all the Gazebo Transport elements that can be used in Python. The final API we will use is contained inside the class `Node`.

The lines `from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg` and `from gz.msgs10.vector3d_pb2 import Vector3d` includes the generated protobuf code that we are going to use
for our messages. We are going to publish two types of messages: `StringMsg` and `Vector3d` protobuf messages.

```{.py}
    node = Node()
    stringmsg_topic = "/example_stringmsg_topic"
    vector3d_topic = "/example_vector3d_topic"
    pub_stringmsg = node.advertise(stringmsg_topic, StringMsg)
    pub_vector3d = node.advertise(vector3d_topic, Vector3d)
```

First of all we declare a *Node* that will offer some of the transport
functionality. In our case, we are interested in publishing topic updates, so
the first step is to announce our topics names and their types. Once a topic name is
advertised, we can start publishing periodic messages using the publishers objects.

> ```{.py}

Reviewer 3: I saw you had the directives `#! [complete]` in the example code. Would it be possible to do the same for these, so we don't have to duplicate the example code here?

Author: You mean for each or the small parts during the Walkthrough? I did it this way just to keep consistency with it is done on the other tutorials.

Reviewer 3: Okay, I'll approve as is, but I think it's better to use the doxygen trick instead of duplicating the code. The other tutorials should also be doing the same.

        return
    # subscribe to a topic by registering a callback
    if node.subscribe(Vector3d, topic_vector3d, vector3_cb):
        print("Subscribing to type {} on topic [{}]".format(
            Vector3d, topic_vector3d))
    else:
        print("Error subscribing to topic [{}]".format(topic_vector3d))
        return
```

After the node creation, the method `subscribe()` allows you to subscribe to a
given topic by specifying the message type, the topic name and a subscription callback function.

```{.py}
    # wait for shutdown
    try:
      while True:
        time.sleep(0.001)
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
      pass
```

If you don't have any other tasks to do besides waiting for incoming messages, we create an infinite loop that checks for messages each 1ms that will block your current thread
until you hit *CTRL-C*.

## Updating PYTHONPATH

If you made the binary installation of Gazebo Transport, you can skip this step and go directly to the next section. Otherwise, if you built the package from source it is needed to update the PYTHONPATH in order for Python to recognize the library by doing the following:

```{.sh}

> export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:<path to ws>/install/lib/python

Reviewer 3: This assumes the source installation is colcon. If the user simply installed `gz-transport` using `cmake`, this would be slightly different.

Author: Done.

```

## Running the examples

> Open two new terminals and directly run the python scripts downloaded previously.

Reviewer: still pending

> Open two new terminals and directly run the python scripts downloaded previously.

Author: Done.

From terminal 1:

```{.sh}
python3 ./publisher.py
```

From terminal 2:

```{.sh}
python3 ./subscriber.py
```

In your publisher terminal, you should expect an output similar to this one,
showing when a message is being published:

```{.sh}
$ ./publisher.py
Publishing 'Hello' on topic [/example_stringmsg_topic]
Publishing a Vector3d on topic [/example_vector3d_topic]
Publishing 'Hello' on topic [/example_stringmsg_topic]
Publishing a Vector3d on topic [/example_vector3d_topic]
```
In your subscriber terminal, you should expect an output similar to this one,
showing that your subscriber is receiving the topic updates:

```{.sh}
$ ./subscriber.py
Received StringMsg: [Hello]
Received Vector3: [x: 2.0, y: 15.0, z: 20.0]
Received StringMsg: [Hello]
Received Vector3: [x: 3.0, y: 15.0, z: 20.0]
Received StringMsg: [Hello]
Received Vector3: [x: 4.0, y: 15.0, z: 20.0]
```
## Threading in Gazebo Transport

> The way Gazebo Transport is implemented, it creates several threads each time a node, publisher, subscriber, etc is created. While this allows us to have a better paralization in processes, a downside is possible race conditions that might occur if the ownership/access of variables is shared across multiple processes. Even though python have it's [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock), all the available features are bindings created for it's C++ implementation, in other words, downsides commented before are still an issue to be careful. We recommend to always use threading locks when working with object that are used in several places (publisher and subscribers). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way Gazebo Transport is implemented, it creates several threads each time a node, publisher, subscriber, etc is created. While this allows us to have a better paralization in processes, a downside is possible race conditions that might occur if the ownership/access of variables is shared across multiple processes. Even though Python have it's [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock), all the available features are bindings created for it's C++ implementation, in other words, downsides commented before are still an issue to be careful. We recommend to always use threading locks when working with object that are used in several places (publisher and subscribers). 
```

Author: Done.

> The way Gazebo Transport is implemented, it creates several threads each time a node, publisher, subscriber, etc is created. While this allows us to have a better paralization in processes, a downside is possible race conditions that might occur if the ownership/access of variables is shared across multiple processes. Even though Python have it's [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock), all the available features are bindings created for it's C++ implementation, in other words, downsides commented before are still an issue to be careful. We recommend to always use threading locks when working with object that are used in several places (publisher and subscribers). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The way Gazebo Transport is implemented, it creates several threads each time a node, publisher, subscriber, etc is created. While this allows us to have a better parallelization in processes, a downside is possible race conditions that might occur if ownership/access of variables is shared across multiple threads. Even though Python has its [GIL](https://wiki.python.org/moin/GlobalInterpreterLock), all the available features are bindings created for its C++ implementation, in other words, the downsides mentioned before are still an issue to be careful about. We recommend to always use threading locks when working with object that are used in several places (publisher and subscribers). 
```

Author: Done.

We developed a couple of examples that demonstrate this particular issue. Take a look at a publisher and subscriber (whithin the same node) that have race conditions triggered in the [data_race_without_mutex.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/data_race_without_mutex.py) file. The proposed solution to this issue is to use the `threading` library, you can see the same example with a mutex in the [data_race_with_mutex.py](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/python/examples/data_race_with_mutex.py) file.

You can run any of those examples by just doing the following in a terminal:
```{.sh}
python3 ./data_race_without_mutex.py
```

or

```{.sh}
python3 ./data_race_with_mutex.py
```

## Advertise Options

We can specify some options before we publish the messages. One such option is
to specify the number of messages published per topic per second. It is optional

> to use but it can be handy in situations like when we want to control the rate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to use but it can be handy in situations where we want to control the rate
```

Author: Done.

```{.py}
    pub = node.advertise(topic_name, StringMsg, opts);
```

Next, we advertise the topic with message throttling enabled. To do it, we pass opts
as an argument to the *advertise()* method.

## Subscribe Options

A similar option is also available for the Subscriber node which enables it
to control the rate of incoming messages from a specific topic. While subscribing
to a topic, we can use this option to control the number of messages received per
second from that particular topic.

We can declare the throttling option using the following code :

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.transport13 import Node, SubscribeOptions

    def stringmsg_cb(msg: StringMsg):
        print("Received StringMsg: [{}]".format(msg.data))

    # Create a transport node and subscribe to a topic with throttling enabled.
    node = Node()
    topic_name = "/foo"
    opts = SubscribeOptions()
    opts.msgs_per_sec = 1
    node.subscribe(StringMsg, topic_name, stringmsg_cb, opts)
```

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    opts = SubscribeOptions()
    opts.msgs_per_sec = 1
    node.subscribe(StringMsg, topic_name, stringmsg_cb, opts)
```

> In this section of code, we create a *SubscribeOptions* object and use it set message rate (the member `msgs_per_sec`). In our case, the message rate specified is 1 msg/sec. Then, we subscribe to the topic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this section of code, we create a *SubscribeOptions* object and use it to set message rate (the member `msgs_per_sec`). In our case, the message rate specified is 1 msg/sec. Then, we subscribe to the topic
```

Author: Done.

file into the `gz_transport_tutorial` folder and open it with your favorite editor:

\snippet python/examples/requester.py complete

### Walkthrough

```{.py}
    from gz.msgs10.stringmsg_pb2 import StringMsg
    from gz.transport13 import Node
```

Just as before, we are importing the `Node` class from the `gz.transport13` library and the generated code for the `StringMsg` protobuf message.

```{.py}
    node = Node()
    service_name = "/echo"
    request = StringMsg()
    request.data = "Hello world"
    response = StringMsg()
    timeout = 5000
```

On these lines we are creating our *Node* object which will be used to create the service request and defining all the relevant variables in order to create a request, the service name, the timeout of the request, the request and response data types.

```{.py}
    result, response = node.request(service_name, request, StringMsg, StringMsg, timeout)
    print("Result:", result, "\nResponse:", response.data)
```

Here we are creating the service request to the `/echo` service, storing the result and response of the request in some variables and printing them out.

## Service Responser

> Unfortunately, this feature is not available on python at the moment. However, we can use a service responser created in C++ and make a request to it from a code in python. Taking that into account, we will use the [response.cc](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/example/responser.cc) file as the service responser.

Reviewer: still pending

> Unfortunately, this feature is not available on python at the moment. However, we can use a service responser created in C++ and make a request to it from a code in python. Taking that into account, we will use the [response.cc](https://github.com/gazebosim/gz-transport/blob/gz-transport13/example/responser.cc) file as the service responser.

Author: Done.

## Running the examples

> Open a new terminal and directly run the python script downloaded previously. It is expected that the service responser is running in another terminal for this, you can refer to the previous tutorial \ref services.

Reviewer: still pending

> Open a new terminal and directly run the python script downloaded previously. It is expected that the service responser is running in another terminal for this, you can refer to the previous tutorial \ref services.

Author: Done.
